---
Pr-id: General Theory of the Precariat
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 25
Type: book
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 00
Article-title: Chapter 1. Precarious Times
Article-status: accepted
Author: Alex Foti
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  precarious, editor, activist, creator of EUROMAYDAY and writer of ANARCHY IN THE EU, theorist of the Precariat, Great Recession, Europe
Abstract:   General Theory of the Precariat by Alex Foti
Keywords:   precarity, precariat, europe, recession, revolution, economy
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0

---

# Chapter 1. Precarious Times

We live in precarious times, shaken by the long, global economic crisis,
and the recent shift to the right of the global political axis. Our
cataclysmic age has many villains and few heroes, and the precarious are
amongst them. The precariat is millions-strong in Europe, North America,
East Asia, indeed in all the countries existing under contemporary
informational capitalism. Who’s precarious? A call center operator is
precarious. A fast food worker is precarious. A temp coder is
precarious. An adjunct professor is precarious. In fact, all youth
living and working under informational capitalism are precarious. The
precarious are the underpaid, underemployed, underprotected,
overeducated, and overexploited.

The *Precariat,* a word that was first introduced in English in 2004
thanks to the EuroMayDay movement, is the class of precarious workers.
It contains the mass of people working temporary, part-time, freelance
contracts under advanced capitalism. According to the New York Times
Crossword Puzzle, ‘the precariat is the class of people whose lives are
precarious because they have little or no job security’.[^06chapter1_1] Thus the
precariat includes all those who work short-term contracts, as well as
those who are made temporarily or permanently jobless. NEETs,[^06chapter1_2]
interns, and apprentices also need to be added to this mix. The
precariat is a class and it is a generation. It’s the new class of
workers, and it’s the younger cohort of the labor force. But the logic
of *precarity* pervades the entirety of society, squeezing the middle
class out of decently paid, long-term jobs. Three decades of neoliberal
labor market deregulation has swollen the ranks of precariat, and the
financial crisis has made the ranks of the precariat further balloon. In
fact, this emergent class includes all the casual workers that ensure
the life and reproduction of the Western European, North American, and
East Asian poles of advanced capitalism. The precariat distrusts the
existing political system and remains largely outside traditional
unions. Yet its political potential exceeds national boundaries and
governments; it is a force that could defeat neoliberalism, nationalism,
and engender a radical transformation of capitalism. Simply put, it is
the precariat that will topple the oligarchy.

Twentysomethings and thirtysomethings are the bulk of the precariat,
mostly composed of urban youth of mixed ethnicity and social provenance.
Millennials in contingent employment and the younger Generation Z who
are just out of college, and now out of jobs, constitute the *Precarious
Generation*. I will discuss how precarious youth stands at the
crossroads of history as the (unwilling) protagonist of the wave of
political protest brought to life by the crisis of neoliberal
capitalism. Insecure, unsafe, abusive, no-future jobs are the hard
reality of young people’s lives in the late 2010s. Now that total labor
market flexibility has become the norm in the so-called ‘gig economy’,
the young find themselves working precarious jobs in every region of
informational capitalism: America (where they are usually referred to as
*temps*), Europe (where they are called *précaires, precari@s,
precari/e*), Japan (where they are known as *hiyatoi* and *freeters*)
and China (where young office workers mockingly refer to themselves as
*diaosi,* losers in dead-end jobs*).* Due to the decades of neoliberal
assaults on organized labor, leading to de-unionization and the aging of
surviving union members, the precariat has had to fend off for itself in
the worst job market on offer since the end of World War Two. Organizing
the self-organization of the precariat is thus crucial to reverse
inequality, and redistribute income away from rents and profits towards
wages. This would fundamentally rearrange both the political and
economic relations of society, thus potentially enabling an economic
recovery according to an egalitarian framework.

Precarity afflicts all those generations that have entered the job
market after the privileged and spoiled baby-boomers: people aged 18-45
belonging to Generations X, Y, and Z who have seen their lives taken for
ransom by precarious employment. Precarity also affects middle-aged
people thrown out of permanent jobs, who have a rightful claim to count
themselves as precarious. The French distinguish between precarious
natives (*jeunes précaires*) and those made redundant who used to have a
steady job (*déclassés*, literally translated as ‘those who have lost
rank’). We are interested in the former, because they are the active
members of an increasingly self-conscious precarious class, the
precariat, which has already destabilized governments and regimes, and
is shaping the kind of economy and polity that will emerge after the
Great Recession.[^06chapter1_3]

*Precarity* is the labor, and life, condition marked by unsteady
employment and intermittent income afflicting young, immigrant, and
female labor. Precarity means not knowing where the next paycheck is
going to come from, and that this is the normal condition of living and
working under contemporary capitalism. The diffusion of precarious jobs
has been mightily accelerated by the crisis. Precarity, also referred to
as *precariousness,*[^06chapter1_4] is the generalized job insecurity ultimately
achieved by thirty years of neoliberal hegemony regarding economic and
political affairs. Since the 2008 financial crisis, with its vicious
cycle of business closures, lay-offs and cuts in social spending, vast
segments of the population have been forced to live in precarious
conditions. The Great Recession has made the poor poorer because of
austerity, and shrunk the middle-class everywhere, as AI and automation
create additional labor displacement and exacerbate the exceptionalist
bias of the crisis. Due to the social ravages inflicted by the Great
Recession, and the disastrous policy responses to the crisis, people are
suffering from economic deprivation in record numbers, and precarious
work has become the new normal: precarity is the new reality. Mass youth
unemployment is the legacy left by neoliberalism after decades of
unchallenged rule.

The precarious condition affects all those who have few, or no rights in
the workplace, because they are excluded from the job protection and
social security traditionally associated with full-time employment. The
precarious are the outsiders of the labor market, since they are
excluded from the Fordist-era class compromise still providing a modicum
of welfare and social security to their forebears. Their role in the
information economy is essential, yet they have a say on neither labor
relations, nor and political policy. The precarious are subject to
flexible exploitation, or *flexploitation*: one day overworked, the
following day out of work; one week zero hours, the next thirty on
late-night shifts. Not only is their income unpredictable, but also
their work schedules. One might say the precarious are quantum workers,
existing in a superposition of employment states, both temporarily
employed and temporarily unemployed. Their social identity is in flux:
schizophrenic. A precarious is a worker and a non-worker, a citizen and
a non-citizen. The precarious suffer from the indignities of low pay,
powerlessness, being blackmailed on the job, and (although this void is
being filled in Spain and elsewhere) under-representation in politics
and government: it took more than a decade for the reality of precarity
to sink in, and shape (inter)national discourse regarding youth
unemployment and social exclusion.

The fact is that the precarious are stressed people, constantly fighting
for survival, as well as freedom from the steady encroachment into their
lives of the capitalist state. The precarious tend to be populist in
their aspiration to redistribution, and anarchist in their refusal of
authority and freedom of personal development and expression untainted
by government, or corporate, control. Stress and frustration in the
workplace inevitably contaminate the home. Thus, labor precarity soon
leads to existential precariousness, where young households constantly
have to battle the twin demons of psychological depression and social
exclusion, and often succumb to them. Personal debt, public service
cuts, and rising living costs all translate into an inescapable fact: a
precarious person is always a paycheck away from joblessness and
homelessness.

Yet precarity is not the same thing as poverty, as contemporary British
sociology seems to suggest. Precarity is a labor condition that can lead
to poverty, but the precarious are not the same thing as the poor.
Poverty is economic destitution, where people are completely dependent
on the state, charity networks, and criminal rings for their livelihood.
Precarity, however, is the social condition marked by flexible
employment and fluctuating income. Whilst precarity usually provides
workers with the means of subsistence, it nevertheless puts them in a
situation of economic uncertainty and social insecurity. No matter how
much money they make today, the precarious are never sure what they’ll
earn tomorrow. Being precarious means having to jump from temporary job
to temporary job in a gig economy that whirs without end on smartphones,
for the benefit of consumers, and to the detriment of workers. On-call
workers are trying to organize against Uber, Deliveroo, etc. to be
recognized as employees rather than independent contractors by the
corporations that profit from digital platforms that hire people and
deliver services to people. The circus of precarity forces people to
become veritable contortionists, juggling jobs and irregular incomes
with family duties, as they walk the tightrope of life in precarious
balance over the social abyss (and down there safety nets are being
removed by austerity-minded politicians!). The sharing economy is
expanding fast in all of capitalism’s metropoles, but it’s certainly not
sharing its profits with drivers, cleaners and delivery workers.[^06chapter1_5]

The social relevance of the precariat, as well as its potential to
impose radical change, remain largely unexplored in mainstream writings
on politics and economics. This book contends that the precariat is both
the most exploited class, and the one, which creates the most social
value: the various political insurrections of 2011 were in fact led by
the precarious generation. The revolutions of 2011 can be seen as
attempts to bring down neoliberal capitalism and state despotism, in
order to replace them with democratic, egalitarian, and ecological
alternatives. My contention is that today we, the precarious, need
revolutionary means to achieve these transformative, progressive, and
reformist ends. The current wave of political polarization favors
political reaction in various (and often deadly) forms. We need
revolution to bring about a social, and environmental, reform of
capitalism, since the world’s interests are presently stacked in favor
of fascist versions thereof. The emergence of national populism as state
ideology in America, Russia, Turkey, and elsewhere, poses
social-democrats and liberals with an existential choice: either give in
to radicals who advance both social and civil rights, or be swept away
by the populist right, as happened time and time again in 2016. A
titanic clash is taking place in Europe to defend open borders and mixed
societies from the continental minions of Vladimir Putin and Donald
Trump. Everywhere, the return to the nation-state is evident, even under
the banners of left-populism. Threatened from the east and the west, the
European Union is coming apart at the seams. Liberals, conservatives,
and social democrats no longer appeal to the consensus of the European
electorate. This threat to the neoliberal establishment is mostly coming
from xenophobic movements both old and new. However, a post-socialist,
eco-populist alternative can be found and fought for, as the municipal
victories of movement forces in Barcelona and Madrid portend. Spain,
Portugal, and Greece have shifted towards a form of left populist,
albeit forms with a host of political contradictions. But better Syriza
in government, and Podemos in parliament, than the shift to the radical
right presently seen in the rest of the Eurozone: with Le Front National
besieging France, the fascistic right beaten from the threshold of the
presidency in Vienna, xenophobic populism dictating foreign policy in
the Netherlands, and the islamophobic *Alternative für Deutschland*
(AfD) rising in the polls in Germany. Indeed, the AfD’s rise appears,
most worryingly, to be at the expense of ruling Christian-Democrats, who
have imposed *Ordoliberismus* at home and austerity on Southern Europe,
putting national interest ahead of European solidarity, thus unraveling
more than half a century of European integration, as Britain sets sail
from the European Union for the uncertain shores of nationalist
patriotism.

I am not, however, claiming that the precarious are merely the passive
victims of recent political turmoil. In France, Italy, and Spain, they
have managed to mount significant challenges to the status quo. In 2006
against the CPE (the first-employment contract proposed by Chirac and
Villepin), then again in 2016 against the Loi Travail (the anti-labor
reform passed by François Hollande and Manuel Valls), the precarious
youth of France took to the streets and seized the squares for weeks,
spooking Gaullist and Socialist governments alike. Italy created the May
Day for the precarious at the height of the anti-globalization movement
(2001-2008), an experience that evolved into the nation-wide *Sciopero
sociale* in 2015 led by social center collectives and student movements.
Furthermore, the recent \#Lottomarzo on 8 March 2017 saw Italian young
women striking in support of the Ni Una Menos global movement, as well
as the pink tide in the US, agitating for a \#feministrike across the
world. Spain’s precarious were pivotal in the Indignados’ mobilizations
of May 2011, animating key groups like Juventud Sin Futur and Democracia
Real Ya, and are the core voters of Podemos, the left-populist political
formation born out of the country’s recent period of social turmoil.

Indeed, a new protest culture was incubated by the Italian, Spanish, and
French precariat’s penchant for creativity and hybridization. Mixing
cyber-anarchy with queer self-expression, social mutualism with
political solidarity, urban liberation with ecological communes, and no
border anti-racism with basic income egalitarianism, they have created a
social-populist synthesis. Similarly, the revival of American radicalism
is fundamentally predicated on the success of the living wage movement,
which from California to New York is fighting for a doubling of the
minimum wage. Both the Fight for \$15 movement, as well as those calling
for the unionization of fast food workers, have significant links with
Black Lives Matter. In the space of only a few years, theirs’ has become
the most important labor conflict in the world, mobilizing hundreds of
thousands of service workers in restaurants, supermarkets, schools, and
homes against anti-union employers. Redistribution within contemporary
capitalism begins with victory of the Fight for \$15 movement over
McDonald’s and Starbucks, and unionization of the world's largest
private employer: Wal-Mart. In spite of the election of Trump, the
American precariat may still prevail in securing a living wage for all
in the world’s most unequal nation. Blocking the appointment of Andrew
Puzder,[^06chapter1_6] a fast-food executive, as Labor Secretary, was an early sign
that the labor movement would not be easily intimidated by the
president. Precarious millennials have ‘felt the Bern’ during the recent
presidential primaries. In reaction to Trump’s seizing the White House,
and Republicans seizing congress, Bernie Sanders, the socialist senator
from Brooklyn, is attempting to push the Democrats towards a form of
left- populism. He is rallying the popular forces of resistance to
discrimination and deportation by saying: ‘Despair is not an option.’
Long gone the days of Barack Obama’s ‘Hope’. The only remaining option
is not to give in to dismay and disarray, but to resist and organize
against national populism. Resisting chauvinism, xenophobia, racism,
class privilege, and rule-by-perjury; this is what is binding movements
across continents. If liberals and social democrats finally understood
that by leaving people exposed to market forces, and pandering to
prejudice, they are colluding with the rise of the populist right, the
task of the people’s resistance would be a lot easier.

Neoliberal capitalism has caused both economic and ecological crises.
Ever-growing numbers of riot police are now needed to protect the caste
of politicians and financiers from the wrath of the people. Society is
polarizing; inequality has escalated since the onset of the Great
Recession, and existing liberal democracies have lost evermore political
legitimacy, undermined by populism on both the left and right. Political
representation and economic management are up for grabs, since liberal
power holders have proved both incapable and incompetent at channeling
popular demand into creating a real democracy, and a just economy.

We are living in a multipolar world where the interests of global and
regional powers prevail over those of ordinary humans, and inequalities
are rising to levels unseen since the 20s. Precarity is not just a labor
and welfare issue, it is the fundamental cause of inequality. It is also
the source of commonality among social actors seeking political redress
and economic retribution. Since the financial crisis of 2008 and the
revolutions of 2011, more and more people have been embracing the social
values of justice and fairness, and moving against market-enforced
values of individualism and competitiveness. The precariat is leading
the fight to attain an equal-opportunity economy, and create real
democracy, one based on veritable popular sovereignty that can finally
redistribute the wealth and power currently appropriated by digital
oligopoly as an economic form of exploitation and control, and by
government oligarchy as a political form of domination and corruption.

The precariat thus has to defeat both political oligarchy and economic
oligopoly, in order to radically improve in its collective welfare and
social standing via creating new institutional arrangements and
political technologies. A new social pact must be created, one existing
between liberals and radicals, hackers and states, movements and
governments, and corporations and society, that will breathe a new life
into democracy, and defend open societies. If not, the reactionary
forces currently at work will prevail, and plunge the world in an
ever-crueler vortex of war and extermination, where all that’s human
will be lost, and nightmarish autocratic powers will emerge; this
amplification of tendencies already at work will lead to truly
apocalyptic scenarios: war refugees, and ecological destruction.

## The Book’s Theses and Corollaries

I propose and seek to demonstrate two major theses:

1.  A new precarious class has superseded the old working-class: the
    service precariat of the 21st century, the analogue of the
    industrial proletariat of the 20th century; the precarious are
    organizing in the workplace, in the streets, and on the net,
    developing a distinctively anarcho-populist ideology and an
    eco-queer culture.

2.  The precariat is the revolutionary subject that opposes, and will
    ultimately overthrow, the (inter)national oligarchs who are
    replacing the economic and political elites that caused the 2008
    financial crisis. Only the precariat has both the energy and
    necessity needed to dismantle neoliberalism, defeat
    nationalist-populism, and dispose of fossil-fuel capitalism.

From these theses, the following corollaries follow:

1.  The precariat is at the frontline of political and labor conflict in
    the aftermath of the Great Recession.

2.  If the precarious radically improve their lot, the resulting jump in
    effective demand will provide an economic solution to the crisis.

3.  If the precariat is the new proletariat, then the existing parties
    and unions of the left are obsolete.

4.  The precariat shall lead a social-populist front capable of
    redistributing power and wealth away from elites, engendering a new
    form of capitalism based on radical democracy, multi-ethnicity,
    transgenderism, and drive the transition towards a biosocial economy
    working for all.

## Dawn of the Precariat: the EuroMayDay Network[^06chapter1_7]

A decade before Guy Standing wrote *The Precariat,*[^06chapter1_8] the precariat
had already named itself. In London, during the fall of 2004,
anti-globalization activists drafted *The Middlesex Declaration of
Europe’s Precariat*, a manifesto that sent forth a call for a
pan-European May Day, and also comprised of a list of demands. It called
for an international May Day across Europe, focusing on precarity and
reclaiming those labors, welfare, and social rights denied to precarious
youth by neoliberal governments and corporations. As the ChainWorkers
Crew had (in)famously written in 2001, the service precariat is to the
industrial proletariat what informationalism is to Fordism. From its
inception, the EuroMayDay was intended to be for the precariat and by
the precariat, the class composed of precarious young, queer, female,
and/or migrant workers temping and toiling in the big cities transformed
by the transnational flows of capital, knowledge, culture, and
information. The precariat was first mobilized by anti-globalization
media and union activists in Milan, then in Barcelona, swiftly followed
by Hamburg, Berlin, Helsinki, Paris, Liège, Malaga, Seville, Lisbon,
Ljubljana, Maribor, Stockholm, and Copenhagen (to name but a few of the
EuroMayDay hotspots).

The Milano MayDay Parade was born in 2001, responding to the lack of
action from mainstream unions over youth employment issues. By 2003, it
had become the city’s most important May Day demonstration, surpassing
the traditional morning march in participation. By then, the
ChainWorkers Crew had started talking of *il precariato sociale (social
precarity)* as the key radicalizing factor of life in the
post-industrial economy. Thus, by fighting for their rights, activists
turned what was previously a social stigma into a sign of pride and
combativeness; *precariato,* in Italy, usually refers to a hopeless
condition one has to suffer passively, rather than a subject composed of
people capable of self-organization and self-empowerment.

We saw the social precariat as the successor of the industrial
proletariat, plain and simple. Unlike social democrats and communists,
we harbored no illusions about working-class commitment to the left.
Furthermore, we were adamant that political and economic arrangements
centered around industrial economy were being supplanted by those of the
network economy. The factory was no longer the central site for class
conflict; the city, the mall, and the web had taken its place. We saw a
new class emerging, composed of women, immigrants, working-class youth,
middle-class youth, cleaners, and hackers, and we imagined it would soon
eclipse the political priorities of an aging generation of blue- and
white-collars. The precariat was destined to be the gravedigger of
neoliberalism.\
\
Online, political media needed to mobilize the precariat that was
created by a creative collective of Milanese subvertisers. Whilst they
began with simply networking Milanese social spaces, in order to combat
precarity in the city’s workplaces between 2001 and 2003, they soon
started to interact with the rest of Italy, and eventually more of
Europe. In doing so, they aimed to reinterpret the discourse surrounding
both the meaning, and purpose, of International Workers’ Day, in the
light of the radical transformations in the economy and jobs that had
occurred thanks to the combined effects of neoliberal deregulation, and
the information revolution. The first ally of the budding precarious
workers’ movement in Milan was Rome’s autonomous student movement, which
has since accumulated an interesting string of theoretical reflections
on precarity.[^06chapter1_9]

It is important to note that the mobilization of precarious workers
would have been unthinkable without the hopes and energies raised by the
Seattle-Genoa movement. With respect to its successor (the Movement of
the Squares of 2011, which inherited some of its characteristics), the
anti-globalization movement involved fewer people but greatly extended
its reach across borders to create a strongly motivated, transnational
community of activists, united by anarcho-autonomous ideology, and
willing to create a common style of struggle and set of demands: no
borders, no discrimination, minimum wage, and (universal) basic income.
All of this occurred on a European scale, in the momentous years when
euro bills entered peoples’ wallets, and the European Union enlarged to
the east. Anti-globalization activists were fewer than those mobilized
by Spain’s Indignados-style radical populism, but managed to cover a
wider range of issues; they never stopped, forever mobilizing onto the
next cause. From Zapatismo to veganism, queer rights to bicycle
activism, food sovereignty to financial transactions, state repression
to climate justice, and finally international solidarity to global
precarity, there was no issue that the motley coalition of black, pink,
red, and green (h)ac(k)tivists left unturned.

It was in this heady atmosphere of peer collaboration and social
innovation that San Precario and their collective[^06chapter1_10] were born on
Sunday 29 February 2004, during an action in a Milanese supermarket that
had remained open in spite of the then existing prohibition on holiday
work. The day was chosen because leap years are intermittent, much like
the incomes of precarious workers. At its height between 2004 and 2006,
San Precario attracted media and labor collectives from all major
Italian cities (Milan, Rome, Turin, Bologna, L’Aquila, Naples, and
Palermo), with several of them featuring their own MayDay Parades. What
turned San Precario into a social meme was the prayer card that had been
designed by a trio of ChainWorkers Crew members. The card became wildly
popular, and could be seen on the desks of precarious workers desks
throughout Milan, as a symbol of their condition and their complicity in
the so-called ‘precarious conspiracy’; although they performed the same
work of other workers, they had no right to the wages and benefits of
permanent employment.

What ultimately projected EuroMayDay, and its accompanying discourse on
precarity, onto the international stage was San Precario with their
subversive inventiveness.[^06chapter1_11] Fantabulous MayDay posters, precarious
superheroes trading cards, elaborate fashion hoaxes like that of Serpica
Naro, which poked fun at the 2005 Milan Fashion Week (its fictive
identity an anagram of San Precario), a Net Parade[^06chapter1_12] featuring DIY
avatars of social rebellion, full sets of precarity tarots, and much
more marked the first few years of the precarious workers movement.
However, what was really crucial for the initial Europe-wide projection
of the May Day movement was an early collaboration with the Las Agencias
and Yo Mango subvertising collective in Barcelona. This cooperation with
Valery Alzaga, who was in charge of the Justice for Janitors campaign in
Europe, as well as the early attention given to the ferments of the
Italian precariat by *Brumaria* and *Greenpepper Magazine* garnered the
attentions of *Mute, Adbusters*, and a host of other European
publications. It also greatly helped that Michael Hardt and Antonio
Negri gave their joint blessing to the EuroMayDay movement, and included
precarious labor in their treatment of the multitude in the second
volume of their *Empire* trilogy.

In 2004, the entire Italian anti-globalization movement came to Milan in
one of the biggest MayDay Parades ever. Over 2004 and 2005, crucial
assemblies were held in Paris, Berlin, and Hamburg, giving rise to the
EuroMayDay network.[^06chapter1_13] It attracted radical European activists working
on precarity and migration from across the socio-political spectrum. In
France, it was Les Intermittents, in Germany it was Fels in Berlin and
no-border networks in Hamburg and Hanau, in Belgium it was Bob le
Précaire and Liège’s heretic left, in Spain it was Precarias a la Deriva
and many other collectives from Malaga to Tarragona (who also created
the movement’s favorite tune, ‘Chiki-Chiki Precario’[^06chapter1_14]), in Finland
it was Prekariaatti, and in Denmark it was Superflex. This list, of
course, could go on and on, including Slovenian, Swedish, Austrian,
Portuguese, Swiss, as well as Japanese and Canadian collectives.[^06chapter1_15] In
the years between 2007 and 2009, interest in articulating a set of
European demands and in undermining the governance of the European Union
grew, after successful anti-Eurocracy exploits in Brussels on Good
Friday in 2006, and in Aix-la-Chapelle (Aachen) on May Day 2008.
Regarding the latter, that year International Workers' Day coincided
with Ascension Day, which since 1950 has stood as the day that the
European elite award themselves with the Charlemagne Prize in Aachen,
where the Frankish king is buried. EuroMayDay spoiled the public event
held in honor of Merkel by Sarkozy, with Barroso and Trichet in
attendance. In those same years, thanks to the influence of Northern
European movements, Milan’s MayDay parade became increasingly queer and
eco-active, concentrating more on LGBT rights and climate justice.

The EuroMayDay network no longer exists, although some of its remaining
fragments reconstituted as the Precarious United of Europe movement, who
participated in the Climate Justice Action of 2009 in Copenhagen. They
have since organized with no-border networks, such as the 2010 Fuck
Austerity! demonstration held in Brussels during the European Union
Confederation march, in order to protest the summit of European Union
finance ministers engineering austerity as the Eurozone's response to
the financial crisis. This ended in mass arrests, with union officials
helping police officers locate the troublemakers.

When the Arab Spring came and set the world alight for two brief but
incredible years, it was clear who the catalysts for the revolutions of
Tahrir and Plaza del Sol were. The precarious youth, the vanguard of the
precariat, were organizing protests via social media, and managing the
logistics for occupations and assemblies asserting the peoples’ power to
the corrupt elites. What Gerbaudo calls anarcho-populist ideology[^06chapter1_16]
was the combination of the often anarchist outlook of activists
(students, temps, freelancers, and the unemployed) with popular needs:
real democracy, and the end of austerity and inequality. To end
precarity is synonymous with ending inequality. To end precarity you
need to put austerity in reverse: redistribute wealth away from the
digital and financial oligarchy, and direct it towards the precariat.
The introduction of universal basic income, and the setting of a \$/€15
minimum wage per hour of work, is the beginning of this process of
reversal.

[^06chapter1_1]: See also ‘What the Fuck is the ‘Precariat’, and Why Should You
    Care?’, *Vice*, 7 May 2017*,*
    https://www.vice.com/en\_ca/article/what-the-fuck-is-the-precariat-and-why-should-you-care-293.
    The article opens with the subtitle ‘Hint: you’re probably in it and
    it sucks’.

[^06chapter1_2]: ‘Not in Education, Employment, or Training’, according to the
    bureaucratic acronym which has become widespread in the UK and
    Europe.

[^06chapter1_3]: There is evidence that Donald Trump won the primaries, and the
    election, thanks to the vote of White people who had been forced by
    the crisis to shift from salaried positions with benefits to wage
    jobs paid by the hour. Their economic resentment fed the most racist
    and irrational candidate America has ever seen, well exceeding
    Reagan and Bush Jr. in his lunacy and conservatism. He is
    politically reactionary, something the history of American
    presidents has never before seen. It's a further sign of how the
    Great Recession has polarized the political landscape between a
    hard-right, and an embattled center-left.

[^06chapter1_4]: Precariousness has the advantage of not being a neologism, and is
    increasingly used in the sense of labor precarity in academic
    writing, such as in Emiliana Armano, Arianna Bove, and Annalisa
    Murgia (eds.), *Mapping Precariousness, Labour Insecurity and
    Uncertain Livelihoods*, London: Routledge, 2017. However, it has no
    conceptual traction, and does not convey the social permanence and
    historical relevance of the precarious condition, while precarity
    (much like modernity, equality, liberty, etc.), contains the power
    of theoretical abstraction. ‘A theory of precariousness’ sounds
    awkward, while ‘a theory of precarity’ doesn’t.

[^06chapter1_5]: See Trebor Scholz, *Uberworked and Underpaid: How Workers Are
    Disrupting the Digital Economy*, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2017

[^06chapter1_6]: Who in 2011 had the gall to declare: ‘We hire the best of the
    worst’, referring to the fast-food workers employed by his
    restaurant chain, Carl’s Jr., from which allegations of widespread
    sexual harassment targeting female employees are starting to emerge.
    Indeed, the fast-food industry has a tradition of treating its
    workers with contempt; the executives of Yum!, the financial holding
    controlling KFC, Pizza Hut, and Taco Bell, commented regarding
    workers’ demands for better compensation: ‘\[b\]efore they walk,
    they have to learn how to crawl.’ See Eric Schlosser, *Fast Food
    Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal,* Boston: Houghton
    Mifflin, 2001.

[^06chapter1_7]: A different version of this section appeared as contribution to
    *Mapping Precariousness* (earlier cited).

[^06chapter1_8]: Guy Standing, *The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class*, London:
    Bloomsbury, 2014.

[^06chapter1_9]: See: Giuseppe Allegri and Giuseppe Bronzini, *Libertà e lavoro
    dopo il Jobs Act*, Rome: Derive e Approdi, 2015; Giuseppe Allegri
    and Roberto Ciccarelli, *Il Quinto Stato*, Milan: Ponte alle Grazie,
    2013; Francesco Raparelli, *La lunghezza dell'onda*, Milan: Ponte
    alle Grazie, 2009.

[^06chapter1_10]: ‘Their’ because ‘San Precario is also transgender’, quoted in
    Ilaria Vanni and Marcello Tarì, ‘The Life and Deeds of San Precario,
    Patron Saint of Precarious Workers and Lives’, *The Fibreculture
    Journal*, 2005
    http://five.fibreculturejournal.org/fcj-023-on-the-life-and-deeds-of-san-precario-patron-saint-of-precarious-workers-and-lives/.
    See also Brett Neilson and Ned Rossiter, ‘From Precarity to
    Precariousness and Back Again: Labor, Life, and Unstable Networks’,
    *The Fibreculture Journal*, 2005,
    http://five.fibreculturejournal.org/fcj-022-from-precarity-to-precariousness-and-back-again-labour-life-and-unstable-networks/

[^06chapter1_11]: Zoe Romano and Chiara Birattari were the two graphic designers
    behind much of San Precario’s and Serpica Naro’s wild creativity,
    while Marxist economist Andrea Fumagalli emerged as the main thinker
    of the group. See www.precaria.org.

[^06chapter1_12]: By gaming artist Molleindustria
    www.molleindustria.org/netparade04

[^06chapter1_13]: www.euromayday.org

[^06chapter1_14]: https://youtu.be/TiWTlSrgALU

[^06chapter1_15]: See Marion Hamm, *Media Practices in the Trans-Urban Euromayday
    Movement of the Precarious*, PhD diss., University of Luzern, 2011,
    for a more extensive list.

[^06chapter1_16]: Paolo Gerbaudo, *The Mask and the Flag: Populism, Citizenism and
    Global Protest*, London: Hurst, 2017.
