---
Pr-id: General Theory of the Precariat
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 25
Type: book
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 00
Article-title: Chapter 4. The Politics of the Precariat: Revolution and Social Populism
Article-status: accepted
Author: Alex Foti
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  precarious, editor, activist, creator of EUROMAYDAY and writer of ANARCHY IN THE EU, theorist of the Precariat, Great Recession, Europe
Abstract:   General Theory of the Precariat by Alex Foti
Keywords:   precarity, precariat, europe, recession, revolution, economy
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0

---

# Chapter 4. The Politics of the Precariat: Revolution and Social Populism 

During the revolutionary wave of 2011, I was briefly in New York as
Occupy Wall Street activists temporarily re-occupied Zuccotti Park. In
2013, I spent a fortnight in the still-revolutionary Cairo, with its
charred government buildings and politicized soccer hooligans, in charge
of public (dis)order in one of the biggest cities of the world. In
Tahrir, as the sunset, I saw columns of bi-gendered black blocs (an
unexpected sight in a Muslim country), ready to confront the police
placed at the gates of a palace. The clashes continued until dawn. The
following day, my host - sociologist Paolo Gerbaudo – and I woke up to
flames coming from the island in the middle of the Nile: soccer
hooligans were torching the police officers’ club and Egyptian football
league offices, after news had broken of the verdict concerning the
deaths of El Ayed supporters in Port Said. The luxury island of Zamalek,
hitherto spared by the 2011 revolution, was up in flames.

The precariat has already managed to fight creative and impassioned
battles. Precarious creatives gave rise to the EuroMayDay network in the
2000s, which acted as a masthead for temps, intermittents, queers, and
migrants across Europe, while the precarious underclass exploded in the
mega-riots that took place in Paris (2005) and London (2010). In Paris
2006 and 2016, the mobilization of a whole generation against precarity
challenged executive power with insurgent determination. Place de la
République seethed with indignation at the flagrant corruption of elites
and now-discredited political parties. Since the Great Recession of
2008, and the revolutions of 2011, the precariat has been the vanguard
of the people in the Arab Spring, the Spanish May, and in the Occupy and
Blockupy movements. These movements all fueled the anti-establishment
sentiments that burn strong today across the European Union, America,
and the Middle East.

## Great Recession and National Populism

The precarious have been shortchanged for a long time, and a sustainable
solution to the Great Recession requires greatly expanding their
purchasing power via higher wages and basic income. In doing so,
aggregate demand can be boosted, and a progressive solution to the
crisis can be found; this solution – most importantly – reduces
inequality. These social conquests will have to be seriously fought for,
against both the lingering forces of neoliberalism, and the growing
influence of nationalist forces in Europe, bolstered by the victory of
Trump. America is turning toward national populism and white supremacism
thanks to Donald Trump’s capitalizing on the discontent of the
deindustrialized working-class of the Rust Belt during the election. The
forces of neo-conservatism are being revived and put to the service of a
fascist agenda, one which includes the mass persecution and deportation
of immigrants, and the reassertion of a white patriarchy.

The explosion of urban rebellions from Washington to Portland, the mass
resistance to the Muslim ban, and especially the Women’s March, show us
that resistance to national-populist aggression will be strong. Black
Lives Matter emerged in the late Obama presidency to fight against
police brutality; now the battle is against racist rule. European
movements must provide solidarity to the mounting mobilizations of
African-American militants, Latino migrant groups, LGBTQ groups, and
ex-Occupy activists. The unprecedented election of a far-right president
in America puts the seal on years of growing authoritarianism around the
world, from Putin's neo-tsarist Russia, to Erdogan's neo-Ottoman Turkey.
Putin played a crucial role in Trump's victory. A
KGB-agent-turned-president having his man in the White House is
something not even Le Carré could have imagined. Yet all of this is
frighteningly real. Trump was hailed as a savior by Nigel Farage in
Britain, Marine Le Pen in France, Frauke Petry in Germany,
Heinz-Christian Strache in Austria, Geert Wilders in the Netherlands,
and Matteo Salvini in Italy. All of these figures are either funded or
supported by Putin, and share his ultimate objective of dissolving the
European Union. Most of the xenophobic European movements assembled in
Koblenz in early 2017 are directly bankrolled by the Kremlin. Since
2008, Putin's Russia has engaged in active revanchism from Georgia to
Ukraine, and now threatens both Finland and the Baltic Republics.
Poland, which has historically feared Russia, has fallen into
reactionary hands, sharing the fate of Hungary and Slovakia (however,
unlike the former, the latter do not feel threatened by Putin).

The world created at Yalta by Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill is gone
forever; a rising nationalist international (to use Yanis Varoufakis’
expression) now threatens to rule the world from Istanbul to
Vladivostok, in concert with a jingoistic America. Whereas the Great
Depression led to the New Deal, the aftermath of the Great Recession
sees America moving to the extreme right after the initial shift to a
Keynesian center-left under Obama. In Europe, the liberal-, social- and
christian-democratic concert that has governed since 1957 is being
undermined by europhobic forces in France, Germany, Italy, the initial
bedrock, together with Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, on which
Europe was built. After the likes of Boris Johnson and Steve Bannon,
liberal democracy has left Atlantic waters: the historical destinies of
Anglo-Saxons and Europeans no longer seem tied. The empowered national
populism of America and Britain, has forced Europe to get its act
together, culminating in Macron's victory and a new pact with Merkel to
relaunch Euro-governance. Whilst Western and Eastern Europe are
diverging politically, the Eurozone could reverse this trend by actively
striving to deepen overall integration.

In this turbulent scenario, the precariat must become the voice of the
people, and articulate a global project that pragmatically addresses the
basic needs left unanswered by the terminal crisis of neoliberalism.
This project is *ecosocial populism*. The precariat needs to develop an
equivalent of 20th century socialist parties and labor unions, in order
to defend its interests (which are themselves in the general interest).
Social populist parties and syndicates are needed to counter the
reactionary headwinds blowing in.

The creation of precarity was the crime perpetrated by neoliberalism in
order to profit from labor flexibility and globalization. Now that
neoliberalism is meeting its demise at the hands of xenophobic and
inegalitarian forces, the precariat, its size greatly increased by the
Great Recession, must build an anti-fascist, anti-racist, and populist
front. This front must challenge, on both physical and ideological
terms, nationalist and xenophobic movements either in, or clamoring for,
power across Europe, America, and Asia. The precariat attempted to start
a global revolution in 2011. Now it must defeat reactionary forces, and
establish an alternative to neoliberal society.

## The Precariat as Vanguard of 21st Century Revolution

Tahrir, Sol, and Occupy Wall Street were the three topical moments of
the 2011 people's revolution. Each of these movements were incubated,
and led, by the vanguard of the precariat: young university graduates
without a job, and young professionals saddled with a precarious one. In
the third year of the Great Recession, the precariat seized squares in
major cities around the world in a cycle of mass struggles unprecedented
in their width and scope. Indeed, the historical significance of these
upheavals may be greater than that of the global mobilization of
students in 1968; it makes sense to consider the revolutions of 2011 as
the 21st century equivalent of 1848, the Spring of Nations. The Arab
Spring began in Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia, in 2010, and soon spread to Egypt,
Libya, Syria, and Bahrein in 2011. This sequence of revolutions then
sparked revolutions elsewhere, with protests soon engulfing Spain,
Catalonia, Greece, America, Slovenia, Bosnia, Turkey, and Brazil in our
century’s Spring of the People. Three dictators (Ben Ali, Muhammad
Mubarak, Muammar el-Qaddafi) were toppled in 2011 alone, and Bashar
al-Assad’s position was endangered to such an extent that he had to
declare war on his own people, who had dared to question his regime. He
bombed and gassed them. This reaction sparked the bloodiest civil war
since 1945, with Syrian troops being bolstered by Russian air support.
Libya in turn has become a failed state, partially post-Bush Iraq, where
ISIS has similarly found fertile ground, and partially post-soviet
Afghanistan, with rival warlords vying for control of state resources.

Writing from the perspective of early 2017, it’s important to resist the
claim that the revolutions of 2011 brought unmitigated pain to the
world. The so-called Movement of the Squares, led by educated but
unemployed youth, meant to create agoras from which a parliament of
people could rise and challenge the power of political and financial
elites, by reclaiming democratic sovereignty and campaigning for social
measures that would redress the exploding inequalities caused by the
2008 financial crisis. The Great Recession, by causing mass youth
unemployment (a phenomenon still plaguing contemporary capitalist
countries worldwide), created the conditions for revolutionary movements
to expand and cross-pollinate across borders. Occupying city squares
around the world were vast sections of the citizenry, enraged at the
bailouts being handed to bankers and politicians who had been scheming
with global financial institutions and transnational corporations. The
revolution of 2011 demanded political democracy in the Middle East, and
a return to popular democracy and welfare rights in what used to be the
West, until Trumpism rose to power in America. In Europe and the
Americas, the people loudly questioned austerity and inequality, by
denouncing the perpetrator of the crisis: neoliberal capitalism and its
inherently inegalitarian project of empowering the few at the expense of
the many. 2011 meant to empower the many at the expense of the 1%. Its
fighting troops were a societal aggregate plucked from across the
spectrum of civil society, and bound together by a common cause. The
young, who had been made jobless and (supposedly) useless by the crisis,
demonstrated alongside the unionized working-class and members of the
aggrieved petty bourgeoisie. The revolutionary contribution of the
precariat was vital to the mobilization of these previously disparate
groups; the propagation and organization of the logistics of protest
were spread overwhelmingly via social media platforms. Facebook groups,
like the April 6 Youth Movement in Egypt, and Twitter accounts like
*Democracia real YA!* in Spain, were pivotal in spreading the message of
the revolution. Authoritarian regimes invariably tried time and again to
censor – or even entirely shut down – the internet, but in doing so
simply signaled their terminal weakness.

## Anarcho-Populism as the Ideology of 2011

2011 marks the irruption of the precariat into political history. As
Paolo Gerbaudo argues,[^09chapter4_1] the ideology of 2011 was a mix of
cyber-anarchism, no globalism, and true populism, of the sort seen
previously across Russian and America in the late 19th century, which
sought to educate the people (the *Narodniks*), and stop the
depredations of trusts and robber baron (the People's Party). The
Anonymous mask became the veritable symbol of the Revolution, and was
sold in street markets from Cairo to Oakland (this also made money for
Warner Bros., as sales of trademarked masks of Catholic dissident Guy
Fawkes boomed). In fact, the revolution was also about pop culture, as
the author of *V for Vendetta,*[^09chapter4_2] Alan Moore, crossed swords with the
author of *Dark Knight,*[^09chapter4_3] Frank Miller, over the patriotism of the
Occupy Wall Street Movement. This tension presaged the two fronts of the
cultural and political war which was soon to come: the war of social and
national populisms.

Many of the cadres of the 2011 revolution were also part of the
anti-globalization movement of the 90s and 00s, and brought with them
their knack for media subvertising, and consensus culture rooted in
general assemblies and affinity groups. However, whereas the
anti-globalization movement fought global neoliberalism as a largely
abstract enemy which temporarily materialized as World Trade
Organization, G8, International Monetary Fund, and World Bank summits,
the movement of the squares fought national oligarchy first and foremost
– worrying less about ideological purity, and caring more for
inclusivity – by involving ordinary people in public discussions,
reflecting on their needs and aspirations, and thus aggregating a set of
disparate demands into a mighty whole, which converged on one issue: the
lost legitimacy of the existing political and business classes.
Neoliberal elites created the financial crisis and then profited from it
thanks to bailouts and quantitative easing, throwing millions into
poverty and precarity in the process. The revolution loudly proclaimed
what many had already come to think: that incumbent governments had
broken the democratic pact by failing to secure the livelihood of the
majority of the population, and the protection of liberties that are
fundamental to a fair society: welfare, labor, gender, and cyber rights.

  --------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Anti-Globalization Movement                                                   Movement of the Squares
  *Ideology*                  Black anarchism, red marxism, pink feminism, green ecology                    Social populism and cyber libertarianism
  *Values*                    Anarchy, autonomy, diversity                                                  Inclusiveness and unity
  *Actors*                    Global activists                                                              National citizens
  *Enemy*                     Neoliberalism aka the Washington Consensus                                    Political caste and financial oligarchy
  *Media*                     Indymedia, discussion mailing lists, hacker Groups                            Anonymous, Twitter, Facebook, Reddit
  *Organization*              Squatted social centers, affinity groups, social forums                       General and neighborhood assemblies
  *Aim*                       Organizing the unorganized and the excluded: precarious, migrants, peasants   Mobilize the enraged citizenry, defend society from austerity
  *Campaigns*                 Third World debt, climate crisis, persecution of migrants, labor precarity    Financial and political scandals, impoverishment of middle class, government repression
  *Protest Tactics*           Mass blockades, White Overall resistance, black bloc rioting                  Mass encampments in central squares, mass demos and encirclements of government buildings
  *Projection*                Transnational                                                                 National
  *State and Civil Society*   Global civil society vs neoliberalism: anti-statist                           The people vs the elite: reclaiming democratic sovereignty
  *Relation with Left*        Collaboration                                                                 Competition
  Geopolitics                 South vs North                                                                Democracy vs authoritarianism
  Economics                   Fair trade and social responsibility                                          Basic income and social expenditure
  Historical Utopia           End of capitalism                                                             End of inequality
  --------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Social Movements: the 00s vs the 10s 

It makes sense to compare the anti-globalization movement in Genoa
(2001) with the Indignados movement in Madrid (2011). To do so, I have
included below a table from *The Mask and the Flag*, in order to
illustrate how the political landscape has shifted, and how the
precariat should continue the counteroffensive against national
populism. I will do this via comparing the anti-globalization movement
with the Movement of the Squares (as the revolution of 2011 is also
known), given its method of occupying the central squares of cities in
order to stir the population against the elites.

## Revolution and Reaction

Every revolution engenders a counterrevolution. After the French
Revolution came the Vienna Congress, and the repressive armies of the
Holy Alliance of Austria, Russia, and Prussia - the three reactionary
powers who had been defeated by Napoleon Bonaparte at Austerlitz and
Jena, but had ended up winning the war in alliance with Great Britain at
Waterloo. After the Bolshevik revolution, the counterrevolution
triggered the Russian civil war, which was eventually won by Leon
Trotsky's Red Army on behalf of Lenin's Communist Party, against the
White Army which was supported by Western powers. In Europe, reactionary
*Freikorps* and fascist Blackshirts ensured the restoration of the
bourgeoisie by dismantling council communism in both Italy and Germany
between 1919 and 1922, while in America, President Woodrow Wilson
destroyed the post-war ‘red threat’ by persecuting wobblies and
socialists, painting them as traitors to the nation.

The every-revolution-is-followed-by-reaction thesis has been confirmed
by the aftermath of the 2011 revolution, which deeply alarmed
capitalists and dictators around the world. During the Arab Spring, and
the demonstrations in Gezi Park, Hong Kong, Oakland, and Brazil, the
people clamored for equality and democracy. What they got instead was
repression and greater inequality; movements must now confront a
reactionary backlash sponsored by Putin and Trump, while the (hopefully
subsiding) terrorist actions of ISIS are fanning the flames of
anti-immigrant parties in Europe, emboldened by the unexpected turn to
nationalism in the heartlands of neoliberal capitalism. The double
threat that Putin and Trump pose to the existence of Europe becomes more
apparent every day. Trump wants more countries to leave the Union and
imitate Britain’s increasingly europhobic Brexit, and chastises
open-border policies favored by Germany and the European Commission.
This is the reason Merkel has greeted Macron’s victory with a sigh of
relief and is ready to compromise on German economic domination. While
the potential catastrophe of disintegration has been averted, the
Eurozone is still in deep trouble.

## Neoliberalism and National Populism Compared

The rich might still rule the world, but neoliberalism is economically,
politically, and ideologically dead. The Great Recession of 2008 killed
the illusion that neoliberal democracy was the end of the history, and
that free markets led to prosperity. The revolution of 2011 questioned
and subverted the legitimacy of neoliberal governance, but failed to
dislodge global neoliberalism from power. With the hindsight of 2017, we
now know that neoliberalism has been substituted in its Anglo-Saxon core
by neo-isolationist and reactionary forces that I place in the umbrella
category of national populism, while the European liberal center has
held. Still shocked by the unexpected electoral victory scored by Bannon
and Trump, many leftists have rushed to conclude that Trumpism is
government by and for corporate executives that brings neoliberal
tendencies to their logical conclusion, the highest stage of
neoliberalism (to paraphrase Lenin's interpretation of imperialism). I
think this interpretation runs against basic political facts, and that
national populism is a distinctive political current that is opening up
a new phase in the history of capitalism, as its toxic mix of
nationalism, xenophobia, and military escalation signals the death of
Friedmanite neoliberalism (1980-2008). Indeed, it undermines the entire
concept of the western world that was initially built by the Anglo-Saxon
liberal powers that emerged from World War Two, and consolidated in the
long Cold War against Communist Eurasia. We are navigating uncharted
waters. As a provisional compass in stormy seas, below follows a
comparison of the basic characteristics of neoliberalism and national
populism, so we can better understand the nature of the threats posed to
democracy.

  --------------- --------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  *NEOLIBERALISM *                                          *NAZIPOPULISM*

  *Economy*       International free trade                                  Nationalist protectionism
                                                                            
                  restrictive fiscal policy, expansionary monetary policy   restrictive monetary policy, expansionary fiscal policy

  *Geopolitics*   partnership with China, rivalry with Russia               Partnership with Russia, rivalry with China, European disintegration, rebalancing of NATO
                                                                            
                  European Union as NATO ally                               

  *Technology*    Green capitalism                                          Fossil-fuel capitalism

  *Ideology*      Conservative/ moderate                                    Reactionary nationalism, racism, neoconservatism.
                                                                            
                  liberalism, christian democracy, social democracy         

  *Population*    Mass migration and multiculturalism                       Closed borders and white supremacy

  *Culture*       Individualism, liberal feminism, cosmopolitanism          Populism, misogyny, provincialism, manipulation of irrationalism and technology as domination
                                                                            
                  Scientific reason and technology as efficiency            
  --------------- --------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Social Populism vs. National Populism

The politics of the precariat have emerged as a radical response to
neoliberal policies that brought unemployment, insecurity, and exclusion
to swathes of society. As a neoliberal empire consolidated after 1989, a
global counterhegemonic movement coalesced around anarchist and
autonomist principles, and engaged in grassroots practices. The
struggles of the precarious and the unemployed retained this framework
by fighting global corporations, and resisting global summits. Since the
revolution, the politics of the precariat have been left-populist, or
*social-populist*, and aim to restore political and economic equality.
The precariat has shed some of its anarchist and communist purity in
order to experiment with forms of radical democracy based on popular
mobilization and electoral consent. Conversely, the politics of the
oligarchy that constitutes the reaction to the revolution is
right-populist, or *national-populist*. I argue that both constitute
major departures from either the inherited left or the neoliberal right.
Social populism is different from traditional leftist politics because
it rejects class, and embraces the people as a democratic counterbalance
to oligopoly and oligarchy. It is not explicitly anti-capitalist,
although anti-capitalists are part of the social-populist front. Like
classical populism, it favors direct producers and small firms over
major corporations and financial concerns. It advocates an increase in
social spending to escape the recession, and thus is a sworn enemy of
neoliberal austerity. Similarly to national-populists, social-populists
oppose free trade, as in the case of the protest movements against
TTIP/CETA, but on grounds of fairness, not of protectionism. Whereas
national-populists are hostile to immigration, and seek a return to
isolationism and closed borders, social-populists are in favor of open
borders, solidarity with refugees, and a rebalancing of both regional
and global trade. Spanish *Podemistas* denounce international capital
movements as ways for the corrupt bankers and politicians to further
enrich themselves and are likely to reintroduce capital controls if
elected.

  ----------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    *Social Populism*                                                            *National Populism*

  *Ideology*        Egalitarianism, feminism, anti-racism                                        Nationalism, white supremacy, male chauvinism

  *Actors*          Precarious youth, indignant citizens                                         Oligarchs, xenophobic working-class and petty bourgeoisie

  *Enemy*           Financial elite, political caste, police state                               Cosmopolitans, women, minorities, muslims, immigrants

  *Geopolitics*     Southern Europe, Middle East, Latin America                                  U.S., Russia, Britain, Turkey

  *Demands*         Radical democracy, living wage, basic income, climate justice                Cronyism, nepotism, fossil-fuel capitalism

  *Economics*       Fair trade, local development, alternative currencies, expansionary fiscal   Protectionism, restrictive monetary policy

  *Distribution *   Egalitarian                                                                  Inegalitarian

  *Technology*      Open source, sustainable energy                                              Proprietary, fossil-fuel energy

  *Media*           Neighborhood councils, protest social media                                  Charismatic gatherings, fake news viralization

  *Tactics*         Women's Tide, mass civil resistance, labor rights campaigns                  Moral crusades, immigration walls, Muslim bans, criminalization of protest

  *Slogans*         *No Es Una Crisis, Es Una Estafa* (Indignados)                               Make America (Russia, Turkey) Great Again
                                                                                                 
                    *Fight for \$15* (Fast-Food Workers)                                         
                                                                                                 
                    *Rêve Général* (Nuit Debout)                                                 
                                                                                                 
                    *Refugees Are Welcome* (No Borders)                                          
                                                                                                 
                    *Ni Una Menos* (Feminist Strike)                                             
  ----------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

National populism is authoritarian capitalism. Just as Putin filled
government and Gazprom with his Chekist cronies, Trump is filling his
cabinet with his own oligarchs: a racist Justice, an oilman at State, a
climate-denier at EPA. The attempted appointment of a fast-food
billionaire Andrew Pudzer as Secretary of Labor was thankfully defeated
by the Fight for 15 movement, as it emerged that he was both
exploitative *and* guilty of domestic abuse. National populism is
pushing the oligarchic and oligopolistic tendencies of neoliberalism to
their extremes and, unlike neoliberalism, it is deeply nationalist and
irrational. Neoliberalism had an irrational faith in markets, but
espoused scientific rationality in the name of efficiency. National
populism is so enmeshed in the world of ‘post-truth’ that it no longer
believes in science when it is not politically advantageous (exemplified
by Trump’s exit from the the Paris climate treaty). Bush, however
jingoistic and inegalitarian, remained an Atlanticist who refrained from
racism and gynophobia. Trump, on the other hand, is a gleefully immoral
and corrupt person. More importantly, he is a post-neoliberal who openly
rallies for the disintegration of the European Union and NATO, to the
dismay of Germany and France. Romano Prodi, long-time Italian prime
minister and head of European Commission during enlargement to the East
in 2004, recently proclaimed that his Europe (meaning those in Europe
born in the 50s) ‘is dead’, and that he, a progressive catholic, could
only pray to fend off what comes next. This leaves social-populists in
the Eurozone with a big question: what are they going to do with Europe?
The time has come for movements across the European Union to take up
strategy that seeks to direct Brussels and Frankfurt against the
remnants of neoliberalism, and defend Europe from internal and external
aggressions. It will not be easy; the populist right is singing the tune
of democratic sovereignty to better effect, because people instinctively
attach it to the notion of national sovereignty, and this is the central
theme of their entire position.

In fact, ‘sovereignty’ has become a fascist buzzword today, even though
the origins of the concept lie in the work of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and
the French Revolution. A European citizenship would be much more
inclusive than national citizenship, especially in this period of
widespread anti-immigrant sentiment. ‘I thank Italy, I thank Europe’,
the Gambian president of the Black Panthers Football Club said while
accepting an anti-racist prize in Milan. This soccer team is composed of
young African refugees, and is supported by the local autonomous
movement (they are also frighteningly good). It struck me that he
thanked *Europe*. Much like the Syrian refugees waving the European flag
as they walked along Balkan highways to reach Germany in 2015, Milan’s
Black Panthers grasp that Europe is the land of human rights, a
political assembly greater than the sum of its parts. Left-wing
Europeans should ponder this, and not leave the European cause to the
likes of Macron and other European neoliberals. Do not expect liberals
to stop fascism, though. They are vulnerable because they are not people
of action, as they are only trained to administrate the world, not to
defend it. They are too attached to existing institutions to make the
leap necessary to save Europe from nationalism.

The revolutions of 2011 have been defeated everywhere, except in Spain.
In molotov-torched Athens, the crisis brought the Trotskyists of Syriza
to power, but the Tsipras government was unable to resist the draconian
demands made by Germany and the Eurogroup to extend international loans.
The Tsipras’ government relented in spite of the result of the so-called
Oxi referendum in 2015, the only tangible consequence of which was the
resignation of Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis, the only policymaker
in Europe with enough intellectual weight to denounce the falsehoods of
austerity-centric macroeconomic policy (namely that government spending
must be cut in times of crisis, and that the payment of international
debts comes before the welfare of the people).

Neoliberalism lost both its intellectual credibility when it crashed in
2008, and its political legitimacy due to ineptitude of its technocratic
lackeys in their handling of the crisis in the subsequent decade. The
Great Recession was very much self-inflicted, and neoliberals’ pavlovian
response - advocating for smaller governments and a reduction of the
welfare state - has proved suicidal. Neoliberalism is now being
supplanted by nazi-populism. Its thirty-year rule won’t be missed by the
majority of society. However, since 1989, neoliberalism has been
decidedly cosmopolitan, preaching open markets and open societies.
Neoliberalism means free trade and the free movement of capital, which
means open borders to let people move around the world in search of jobs
and opportunities. National populism is none of that. It is
protectionist, racist, and misogynist. It pursues the wages of war
rather than the business of peace. It seeks to reinstate the power of
Whites in societies made multiethnic by neoliberal globalization.

## Europe: From Dream to Nightmare

For a moment, imagine you are suddenly back in the year 2000 again.
Europe was optimistic. The economy was strong, and Al Gore seemed poised
to succeed Bill Clinton as president of the United States. Whilst
noglobal protesters had emerged as spoilers of the party of monetarism
and neoliberalism, and the cinders of the Balkans were still smoldering,
the West appeared triumphant, and neoliberal hegemony inevitable. The
European Union seemed one of its most civilized achievements, having
abolished war and created prosperity, all the while setting out to
absorb post-cold-war Central Europe into its body of supranational
institutions. The euro was just one year old when German politician
Joschka Fischer, in a famous lecture at Humboldt University, sketched
out a plan for a federal, multicultural, and liberal European Union that
united the East with the West. Subsequently, members of both the
European Parliament and European Convention drafted a constitution that
would give a political skeleton to both the single market and single
currency.

However, this fledgling constitution was rejected by French and Dutch
voters in 2005. The tide propelling neoliberal eurofederalism had
irreversibly turned. European elites tried to patch over the problem
with the Lisbon Treaty in 2009, but the europhobic cat was out of the
bag. This sentiment only grew as the Great Recession made its bite felt
between 2010 and 2011 during the euro crisis, when the sovereign debt of
indebted Eurozone countries such as Greece was downgraded by
international speculation, prompting the European Central Bank to
intervene, in order to save the euro and restore financial stability.

Seventeen years later, eurofederalism, once the progressive ideology
commanding the allegiance of European elites, is definitely *passé*:
Britain is leaving, Greece is bleeding, and the European Union, enlarged
to East in 2004, is weakened by the joint threat of Putin and Trump.
Germany is putting its national economic interest above that of the
Union, while Southern Europe fails to counterbalance Northern Europe’s
pressures for fiscal probity and budget cuts for institutions. The
much-touted European miracle of a transnational polity turned out to be
a mirage. The currency is shared, but the debt burden is not. Money is
in the hand of a temporarily enlightened technocracy that buys debt that
is issued by separate national governments, each of which has a
different degree of credibility in the eyes of international investors.
Because of differing credit rankings, German Bunds pay negative interest
and Spanish Bonos pay positive interest rates. Belonging to the monetary
union has actually amplified financial shocks, debtor countries are now
sitting ducks for international financial speculation. The neoliberal
project that propelled the idea of a united Europe forward with the
Maastricht and Schengen Treaties now lies in shambles. The euro did not
lead to growth, but to austerity and unemployment. The free circulation
of goods and labor has yielded to closed borders, and hate for refugees.
National-populist forces are warping politics in France, Italy, the
Netherlands, and even in Germany; all core countries that began the
process of European integration 60 years ago. In short, political Europe
lies in ruins, as nationalism and xenophobia are dangerously on the rise
in both its Western core and Eastern appendix. Reverting to the warring
age of nation states seems an eminent possibility as America turns its
gaze inward, and long-buried rivalries reemerge from the dark past of
European nationalism.

Yet the populist answer to this scenario – exiting the euro – is a
mistake, not only because it would signal the end of Europe, but because
leaving would be a lot costlier than remaining, as sociologist Claus
Offe has argued.[^09chapter4_4] Protectionism and a return to a national economy
are right-wing options that would cut real wages by drastically
increasing the price of imports. The only reformist option for softening
the external constraint, which dictates restrictive fiscal policy in all
European countries with adverse consequences on the population, is to
change the terms of the Maastricht Treaty, and create a parliament of
the Eurozone, one which would hold the Bank, Commission and Council
accountable to European citizens and residents. France is leaning toward
this position. The revolutionary option would instead be to seize power
in the European Union and orient all politics and institutions towards
popular, egalitarian, and environmental ends. A revolutionary call of
this kind would read as such: *we, the precarious and immigrant
generation of Europe, must seize power in Brussels and Frankfurt to
establish a neutral, social, and radical Europe*. However, there is no
existing European movement or party that can command the kind of mass
appeal necessary for such a radical social-populist transformation.
Mainstream European unions, composing the European Trade Union
Confederation (ETUC) have been content with sitting in purposeless
discussion over social Europe with EU employer's lobbies for years,
having little effect on actual EU employment and social policy. Green
parties have a European policy, but these mostly comprise of green
lobbying and policies oriented towards liberal capitalism. Red parties
sit together in Strasbourg and Brussels, but have only sporadically
expressed a unified position on Europe, especially regarding what the
European Union should be. National politics remains paramount for all
leftists, while communists in the various countries of the Continent
have historically opposed European integration.

Right now, Europe seems to be coming apart at the seams, with an unloved
political structure, an outdated economic policy, and an outmoded
foreign policy. Trump is betting on the dissolution of the Union, hedge
funds are betting on the dissolution of the euro, and Germany is
repatriating gold from France and America. The Great Recession hit
Europeans harder than Americans, due to the neoliberal and monetarist
inertia built into existing European institutions. In fact, the European
Union had never weathered a major recession before. Will it survive the
economic crisis its institutions never thought possible? After Macron’s
election, I think it will, since the Franco-German entente upon on which
modern Europe was built is solid (although it should at least be
tempered by a special relationship between Italy and Spain). What is
clear is that the Eurozone’s enlargement to the East has failed to
integrate those countries into the political idea of Europe. However,
this aside, the Baltic Republics are firmly inside the Eurozone, and as
such should be defended from any potential future aggression from Russia
(or elsewhere). What is emerging, in the liberal European center
represented by Macron and Renzi, is the need to create political
institutions for the governance of the euro, the need for which was made
painfully apparent when the unaccountable Eurogroup,[^09chapter4_5] the Eurozone’s
group of finance ministers, laid out draconian (and ultimately
unsustainable) conditions for rescuing the Greek economy in 2015 (taking
their orders from Schäuble, the German finance minister).

Fearing Brexit and its consequences, I wrote a piece for Euronomade
titled *The revolution of the European Continental Republic,*[^09chapter4_6]
proposing a movement for the establishment of a European republic in the
euro area. As Britain leaves and the European Union is in retreat, my
idea is to strategically consolidate the remnants of Europe into a
single state with open borders and federated cities, regions, and
nations. The eurocracy is too scared by recent events to even consider
this. In Juncker’s five scenarios for Europe,[^09chapter4_7] a step toward
political unification was not even contemplated. Angela Merkel said she
was interested in ‘doing less more efficiently’, while France is clearly
for the position ‘those who want more do more’ on debt and defense. At
the moment, no country wants to do ‘much more together’. I think the
only politically viable solution is the Eurozone does so much more that
it becomes a federal republic. In a future parliament of the euro area,
German economic power would be finally counterbalanced by the deputies
of France, Spain, and Italy. An alliance between any two of these three
countries would put Germany in the minority.

## Euthanasia of the Left

If the precariat is to resist the nazi-populist onslaught in Europe and
America, it must develop a persuasive populist alternative in the
institutional realm. The precariat simply cannot win the battles it is
currently fights across the world if it does not develop its own
distinctive ideology, organization, and strategy. The precariat could be
the core of a transnational political movement, defending society from
national-populist reaction, and engendering its emancipation from
neoliberal subjugation. In order to do so, the reliance of the
precarious class on communist ideology in the fight for equality would
be dangerous. Today, equality is a populist concern, socialist demand is
not.

The red left has little to offer the cause of the precariat, save old
memories of 20th century working-class insurrections in what today are
industrial wastelands which overwhelmingly vote right-wing candidates,
and the now-dead guerrilla revolutions led by Giap and Che Guevara. The
left instinctively defends full-time employees and pensioners, whose
interests are always put ahead of the vital needs of precarious people.
However, the interest of the precariat is in fact the general interest,
because the young (and their children) are the future of society.
Defending high pensions at the detriment of welfare has made younger
generations both impoverished and existentially insecure, reducing birth
rates and the formation of new households. The left has decided to turn
its back to the future, by adopting what is essentially a defensive, and
ultimately conservative, posture that will end in certain defeat.
Capitalism is in crisis, yet communism will never recover, because it
stands at odds with contemporary social reality. Its geopolitical
worldview is hopelessly dated, and its understanding of online society
and culture is very limited. The left has only rhetorical gestures with
which to respond to the plight of the precariat, and its thirst for
social and climate justice. Time and again, unions have spurned basic
income for the young, and stayed away from organizing temporary and
posted labor.

Although it is true that Occupy Wall Street brought about a socialist
revival in the America, both in terms of ideological debate[^09chapter4_8] and
political mobilization, there is still no socialism in America, a
century after Sombart first analyzed American exceptionalism, and there
is no longer democracy in America, two centuries after Tocqueville
investigated its fledgling democratic society. Bernie Sanders and
Michael Moore notwithstanding, Trump’s white supremacy program finally
carried the day against Clinton's tone-deaf interpretation of Obama’s
cosmopolitan liberalism. It’s possible that the movement around Sanders
will create a successful brand of radical-populism that can be embraced
by Blacks, Latinos, Native Americans, and militant sections of the white
precariat in their fight against the encroaching nazi-populist regime.

But ‘Feeling the Bern’[^09chapter4_9] aside, wherever red flags are waved, the
crowd consists mainly of gray-haired pensioners. Socialist and
social-democratic parties are declining and out of government in all
European countries, save Sweden and Portugal. It’s a telling sign that
the traditional left has no future. Today, the ranks of the left are
mostly made up of people who were radical in the 70s, and are now
approaching old age. When the wind of public opinion changed, and began
to oppose the sanctity of free market deregulation and liberal
technocracy, the left was unable to successfully resist austerity, and
propose an economic alternative to neoliberalism. This crucially
weakened its relevance and weight. What neoliberalism ultimately failed
to achieve – the complete destruction of the left in Europe and Latin
America – the Great Recession is accomplishing. Christian-Democrats and
Liberals still rule Europe, largely due to fear of what might come after
them: full-blown fascism across the Continent. Spanish left-populist
party Podemos, and its ally in Catalonia, En Comù, have been the only
political movements wielding constituent power after the revolution of
2011, in order to advance a political agenda for and by the precariat.
The social center run by Podemos in Madrid is named *Casa Morada*,
(*Purple House*), since this is the color of the party’s flags. Purple
is also the color of anarcho-feminism. Indignadas and Indignados of the
world, the new horizon of the people is *morado*! The hopes and
struggles of precarious people could be enshrined in a purple flag with
a shocking pink feminist fist. Precisely because it’s an empty
signifier, a new revolutionary flag could be a powerful symbol to
express the unity of the enraged precariat, who are leading the people
toward political and social change.

I argued in *Anarchy in the EU* that chromatology is essential to
understand contemporary political movements. In that text, I discussed
how studying the queer pink punk, black anarchist cyber-syndicalist, and
green climate action components of the post-left would grant us an idea
of where these movements were directed, published as it was in the final
phase of the anti-globalization movement and as the first convulsions of
the Great Recession began. Anarchy is not dead, but communism is, I
argued. This sounds even truer now, as the Chekists (named after Lenin's
secret police), that compose Putin’s inner circle are scheming for world
power, meddling in Europe and the Middle with nefarious intent, and
murderous consequences. On the centennial of the Russian revolution, I
think of the Soviets workers and soldiers, to from Kronstadt and the
Ukrainian anarchist Makhno to the generously populist
Social-Revolutionists, who won the only elections held after the October
revolution. It’s even possible that Putin will use the heritage of 1917
to cement his power. Somebody must storm his Winter Palace.

I'm not questioning Marx's enduring importance as theorist of capitalism
and capitalist crisis. With the Great Recession, Marx’s work is more
relevant now than it has been since the end of the Cold War. In the
immediate aftermath of the financial crisis, *Das Kapital* became a
surprise bestseller in Germany. When a capitalist crisis occurs, it is
natural to turn to Marx, and Marxist thinkers. For example, the global
revival of Gramsci and his theory of political hegemony stressing the
role of popular culture is again relevant in the fight against
right-wing populism. As Perry Anderson, in his inimitable style, writes
the Sardinian communist imprisoned by Mussolini has inspired some of the
best Marxist writing since 1945, in particular the works of Stuart Hall,
Giovanni Arrighi, Ernesto Laclau, and Ranajit Guha. Fordism is, of
course, a Gramscian concept, on par with hegemony, and the notion of
historical bloc. Laclau and Chantal Mouffe borrowed from Gramsci to
define the essential discursive elements of a left-populist
strategy.[^09chapter4_10]

We have already noted how Negri’s discussion of *autonomia* (*autonomy*)
has strongly influenced anti-globalization movements, and the discourse
on precarity. On another front, the critical sophistication of the
Frankfurt tradition of Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, and Herbert
Marcuse, lives on in Judith Butler’s philosophy regarding the queering
and gendering of subjects and Streeck’s political and economic
sociology. Marxist feminism, as represented by the seminal works of
Luisa Muraro, Bell Hooks, Nancy Fraser, and Selma James (among others)
has become a stronger intellectual and social force than it ever was,
even at the height of the women’s liberation movement of the 1970s.

As long as capitalism exists, Marx and the Marxian body of thought will
stay relevant in the 21st century. My polemic is not against Marxism,
but against what’s left of communism,[^09chapter4_11] which looks like a dead-end
strategy by which to emancipate society, and seize state power. Marxist
formations look down on the precariat and secretly hope for an
impossible return to the 70s, the heyday of red influence. They would
like to rewind history to a time before their defeat at the hand of
neoliberalism, and the its subsequent dismantling of the world built by
the Russian Revolution. However, Che Guevara will not rise from the
dead, and *Sandinista* is now just a Clash album. The red left is
moribund, and the Great Recession hasn't resurrected it. In fact, the
longer the communist corpse is left unburied (to borrow a metaphor from
Bifo), the harder the process of defeating inequality and oligarchy will
be. It is revealing that the most important Marxist work written since
the Great Recession, *Capital in the 21st Century,* has been vehemently
attacked by Marxists everywhere for not being sufficiently faithful to
the letter of the prophet.[^09chapter4_12] Having equality and democracy as twin
polar stars, the leftist Post-Keynesian nevertheless exposes
neoliberalism as the most unequal economic regime in living memory, and
encourages people to fight against the financial oligarchy. Most
communists, however, consider it ideologically impure.

Piketty was the main intellectual force behind the doomed presidential
campaign of Benoit Hamon, who arguably had a forward-looking program:
basic income, ecology, taxation of robots, and a parliament for the
Eurozone. By waving the French flag, Mélenchon managed to annihilate him
and the French Socialist Party built by Mitterrand in 1971. In Germany,
former European Parliament President Martin Schulz is campaigning on a
platform centered around universal free tuition (among other welfare
measures) in a desperate bid to end Merkel's long hold on the German
chancellorship. As things stand, he will be defeated, also because he's
let Angie play the European card he should have been playing.
Considering current political trends, it is hard to shake the feeling
that social-democracy is going the way of communism, fading into
historical irrelevance. In Greece, the Panhellenic Socialist Movement
(PASOK) has evaporated, the Spanish Socialist Worker’s Party (PSOE) has
been deserted by young voters, in France, the Socialist Party (PS) is
dissolving in internecine strife, in the Netherlands the Labor Party
(PvdA) was almost erased at the ballot, the Belgian socialists are out
of government, and Scandinavian social-democracy is threatened by
populism and xenophobia much like the rest of Europe (a border post has
been erected on the bridge linking Copenhagen to Malmö to stem the tide
of refugees into Sweden). Collaboration with neoliberalism in the 90s
and 00s, most evident in Tony Blair’s Third Way, is the curse that is
keeping the left out of power now that the crisis could restore its
appeal. Today, most people, frightened by precarity and unemployment,
would subscribe without a thought to the old social-democratic compact
of universal welfare from cradle to grave. The fact is that both
socialists in Latin Europe and social-democrats in Northern Europe sold
out to neoliberalism, and have lost any credibility they once had,
undermining their attempts at campaigning on issues such as equality,
and the welfare state.

The inherited culture of socialism has often proved conservative with
regard to recent social, technological, and intellectual developments.
By remaining focused on the working-class and public employees, it has
refused to acknowledge the precariat as the new class produced by
neoliberal globalization, and thus overlooked precarity as a structural
social condition specific to neoliberalism, the harbinger of a new
radical subjectivity evident in the revolutionary wave of 2011. Just as
the industrial proletariat led the struggle for emancipation in the 20th
century, the postindustrial precariat will lead the fight for 21st
century radical democracy for all and by all across the globe, by
defeating fossil-fuel capitalism, thus staving off catastrophic climate
change and the end of civilization. In order to fix the metabolic rift
with the biosphere (to use theorist McKenzie Wark’s expression), we have
to adopt the ‘labor perspective’:[^09chapter4_13] the perspective of precarious
labor. The left is descending into political irrelevance. It will not be
resurrected by its historic socialist parties, or communist movements.
The precariat needs to look elsewhere for its ideological arsenal,
namely, populism, feminism, and environmentalism. Red is dead, but pink
is very much alive.

As such, my basic message is that we should retain Marx, but let go of
communism. There are two main sources of communist nostalgia. One is
Trotskyism, the minority tendency in international communism that
resurfaced after 1991. It was a major influence on C.L.R. James and
Marxist cultural studies, but the political parties it has inspired in
France, Britain, and elsewhere tend to be sectarian beyond repair. The
4th International usually stands on the right side of geopolitical
issues, because, since due to its historical opposition to Stalinism,
Trotskyists instinctively reject authoritarian regimes. The other source
of this nostalgia is none other than Red China, led by a communist party
which embraced neoliberal capitalism and thus survived, unlike their
Soviet doppelganger. Giovanni Arrighi (formerly an Italian Maoist) wrote
that a Smithian China committed to global free trade could usher the
world toward a post-imperialist phase, no longer characterized by the
center-periphery dichotomy which had shaped all previous cycles of
capitalist accumulation.[^09chapter4_14] As the Braudel-Wallerstein tradition of
historiography tells us, the world economy has been governed by a
succession of dominating financial centers: Amsterdam until the 18th
century, London until the 20th century, and New York until the 21st
centrury. The election of Trump makes Arrighi's prediction highly
relevant. In my view, the only form of intellectually coherent communism
to support China's rise to global hegemony, similar to what European
communist parties did by supporting Communist Russia during the Cold
War. Since I side with Hong Kong and Taiwan’s young democracy activists,
I don't recommend anybody should go that far. However, now that Europe
is caught between Putin and Trump, a deal with China seems a good idea.
It’s the last remaining world power committed to peace and free trade,
because the former is the condition of the latter and China's only
pursuable path to mass prosperity. Furthermore, in a world plagued by
increasing irrationality, the Chinese leadership remains rational and
committed to a long-term plan, as evidenced in Xi Jinping’s charm
offensive at the World Economic Forum, and now his rapprochement with
Trump, after China rattled its nuclear sabers over maintenance of the
One-China policy.

## The Precariat at Davos 

What used to be the annual ritual of self-congratulation held by
corporate elites and their political allies (a ritual that
anti-globalization movement used to vehemently target), has now become a
soul-searching symposium attempting to understand why neoliberal
globalism has been voted out of office in Britain and America. Guy
Standing chaired a session on the precariat and its political
makeup,[^09chapter4_15] his thesis being that the shift to the populist right is
due to the precariat becoming xenophobic and nationalistic. While I do
not buy into this premise, let us examine it more closely.
Fundamentally, he argues that there are two precariats: one nostalgic
and atavistic, and the other progressive. In a nutshell, one voted for
Brexit, the other for Podemos. Many mistakes aside (*lumped* precariat,
instead of *lumpenprecariat;* the weird category of *proficians* for
neoliberal careerists and entrepreneurs; immigrants labeled as
*nostalgics*, considered intermediate between right-wing atavists and
left-wing progressives) evidence disproves his claim that precarious
millennials ever dreamt of voting for either Farage or Trump. The
precariat is not the gelatinous mass of middle-aged people losing their
jobs, as he argues, but is the multicultural multitude of young people
stuck in temporary employment and unemployment, as this book seeks to
point out. This kind of precariat has an overwhelming anti-fascist and
anti-racist sentiment, as mass protests have shown time and again since
2011.

My experience is that migrant labor and precarious labor have joined
forces against racism, abusive work practices, detention centers, gender
inequality, homophobia, and many other kinds of social discrimination.
Second-generation immigrant youth are already prominent actors in social
conflict and labor organizing; if you are young (and thus precarious),
you tend to care more about class than ethnic or religious identity. In
fact, for Generation Z, multiethnicity is a way of living. The precariat
is spontaneously social-populist, always seeking the welfare of the
greatest number of people possible. You have to look elsewhere for
nostalgia, in the White working-class and the White lower middle-class
of shopkeepers, artisans, pensioners, and other social strata still
attached to the nation-state. All things told, this is what the class
pyramid in contemporary capitalism actually looks like:

  ------------------------
  Financial Elite
  Office Salariat
  Petite Bourgeoisie
  Industrial Proletariat
  Service Precariat
  Urban Underclass
  ------------------------

Table 11: The Class Pyramid of Advanced Capitalism, 2010s

Below the commandeering 1% of financiers and tycoons, there is a
privileged stratum of salaried employees and professionals. They are the
insiders of the informational job market, and upholders of the
neoliberal regime now damaged beyond repair. Government employees and
officials also belong to this category. The salariat mostly votes
center-left and center-right, and tends to be immune to the worst forms
of racism. Below them come the traditional petty bourgeoisie and
working-class, which have mostly shifted towards the right in the last
two decades, after a century of voting for socialists and communists.
Considering the role of Wisconsin, Michigan and the Rust Belt states in
securing the electoral vote for Trump, we must look to the white
working-class and underclass if we want to locate people fueling
right-wing populism today. The precariat either does not vote, or votes
for left-populist candidates. Millennials have fewer social guarantees
than the salariat, and display stronger individualism, but have moved to
the left since the Great Recession. They have also been harbingers of
innovation in political communication; from the victory of Zapatero in
2004 (the SMS chain the spread the news of the right-wing government’s
deception, after media outlets were shut down), to the victory of Obama
in 2008 (strategic use of social media in winning primaries and
presidential elections), and, most importantly, in the revolutions of
2011, where the alliance of the cognitive precariat with the insurgent
population through social media was central in achieving large-scale
participation in protests.[^09chapter4_16] It’s the precarious Millennials that are
also behind the rise of Sanders in America and Corbyn in Britain.

In my own country, the precariat largely votes for the Five Star
Movement, the populist force led by mercurial comedian Beppe Grillo,
which defies easy classification. The movement practices a warped form
of online democracy, embraces environmental issues (especially of the
unscientific kind), and has an overall egalitarian stance. It also has a
left-leaning mayor in Turin, who, unlike her colleague in Rome, is
competent and sufficiently respected. However, the movement – founded by
Grillo and now deceased internet entrepreneur Gianroberto Casaleggio –
has also flirted with the kind of Europhobia and racism practiced by
Lega and the fascist right. They could well win the upcoming general
elections against Renzi’s Democratic Party, which has been in disarray
since their stinging defeat over the referendum on whether to reform the
constitution and abolish the Senate, a personal reversal for the
Florentine leader. One of the most popular points in their program is
the introduction of a basic citizenship income, in order to combat
poverty. This priority clearly makes them social-populist, while their
hostility to the euro and immigration places them in the
national-populist camp. Also, whilst their online deliberation platform
– Rousseau – is similar to that used by Podemos, votes can be reversed
if the omnipotent leader says so, as recently happened in Genoa, where
internal elections for candidate to mayor were voided, and the winning
candidate replaced by one favored by Grillo, who miserably lost the
election (Berlusconi's right-wing coalition won). In order to classify
the Five Star Movement, I often use an analogy from chemistry. They are
like sodium chloride (table salt) neutral on the political litmus scale,
but the result of a combination of a left acid and a right base.
Territorially, of the two large city administrations they currently
control, Turin leans to the left (the NoTav movement voted massively for
Chiara Appendino), while Rome leans to the right (and the incompetent
mayor, Virginia Raggi and his collaborators come from right-wing
formations). A significant minority of the precariat, influenced by
social movements in large cities, instead votes for Italy’s fragmented
left, or is anarcho-autonomist (and thus refrains from voting at all).

The Italian precarious workers’ movement rose and fell with the fortunes
of the anti-globalization movement and of the European project, but is
now adapting to the new political framework created by the Great
Recession, the revolution it spawned, and the global reaction against it
that is currently taking place. The politics of the precariat must be to
occupy the state to defeat precarity. The conquest of basic income is
fundamental, but, politically, is only the first step. The precariat
must seize the city, as the proletariat once sought to seize factories.
This is the reason the revolution of 2011 occupied metropolitan squares,
not industrial workplaces, and led to the conquest of municipal, rather
than state power.

The ultimate defeat of national populism and the superseding of
neoliberalism depends on the mobilization of the precarious youth, who
will lead the people in a broad front against financial oligarchy, and
form new transnational municipal and labor alliances. Traditional
parties are lost, but the people are not, and labor unions are
reawakening thanks to the pressure of grassroots movements. However,
expansionary policies for a leftward solution to the issues of the Great
Recession will have to be bitterly fought for against vested money and
oil interests, and ecological constraints are likely to put limits on an
egalitarian growth strategy.

It is the precarious youth that have lost the most because of the Great
Recession. Their disillusionment and rage has, however, made history,
from Tahrir to Occupy Wall Street, and Madrid to Istanbul. The
Indignados Movement that paralyzed Spain in the spring of 2011 was
started in Plaza del Sol, Madrid’s central square, by a group of
precarious young workers and students who erected their tents and
refused to move until their demands were heard by the rest of society
(they put little faith in the then socialist government). People from
all walks of society responded in huge numbers (although young
precarious individuals made up the single largest section of those
involved), and set up permanent protest camps (*acampadas*) in all the
major cities of Spain, including Barcelona’s Plaça Catalunya, on 15 May.
It was a social upheaval that involved between 6 and 8 million people,
and was supported by the majority of Spaniards, according to opinion
polls. Occupy Wall Street followed suit on 17 September 2011, and the
protest camp in Liberty Square became a magnet for all those outraged at
how the financial class had been bailed out at the expense of the
people. Student workers, disgruntled temps, interns, and the unemployed
were at the forefront of the protests, and were the main social force
behind the popular assemblies that vented the anger, and articulated the
demands, of the 99%. A form of anarcho-populism is evident in both
movements, as sociologist Paolo Gerbaudo[^09chapter4_17] wrote in *The Guardian*.
They both talked on behalf of a wronged people against economic and
political elites, as in traditional-populist discourse, but they shared
with traditional anarchism a passion for direct (online) democracy, and
renewed anarchist praxis in their quest for free social networks and
transparent democracy (evident in associated movements like Anonymous).

It is the precarious who are the revolutionary activists of the 21st
century, from Tahrir to Plaza del Sol, Zuccotti Park to Gezi Park, and
far beyond. The precariat is not the working-class of communist lore, it
is the digital generation politicized and radicalized by the crisis,
even though, much like the industrial proletariat of yore, it occupies a
central position in the production of value under capitalism,
particularly in the lucrative information and creative industries. The
precarious are at the core of contemporary accumulation, but remain on
the periphery of political and social citizenship. Even in Europe, they
are excluded from the social contract and the inherited welfare state,
which is largely conditional on full-time employment, and thus cannot
address the generalization of precarious work.

In 2011, the precariat has combined technical expertise, creative forms
of struggle and popular mobilization, giving birth to the largest
protest movements the world has seen since 1968. Cross-fertilized by the
Seattle-Genoa antiglobalization protests of the early 00s, a generation
of activists has become a generation of revolutionaries. Government
employees went on strike and protested, while young people built
barricades and rioted, until the invariably heavy hand of the state
squashed budding social alliances that threatened incumbent governments
(which, of course, included members of the elite who had a stake in the
existing financial system). The Indignados Movement (locally known as
the 15-M Movement) survived the repression, and morphed into a catalyst,
turning public employees against austerity economics (Mareas
Ciudadanas), from the defense of public health and education to the huge
movement against evictions (PAH), to damning exposes of the financial
corruption (Partido X) of the austerity government led by the
conservative, centralizing, and militantly catholic Popular Party (PP)
in power. In America, the Occupy Movement was squashed by concentrated
police repression orchestrated at both the local and federal level, and
further declined after the partial success of the 2012 May Day General
Strike (the flashpoint of which was Oakland, a trade port, rather than
the financial marketplace of New York). These defeats aside, the
precariat is still on the move, from Korea to Brazil.

Precarity is both exploitation and liberation. It deprives young workers
of their labor and welfare rights, but leaves them uncommitted to the
work ethic, and strict discipline of their forebears. Precarious people
express themselves outside work, establishing communities of scope and
support. Yet with the crisis the exploitative element of flexible jobs
is increasingly apparent: the precariat must flex its muscle and fight
for its own rights, for its interests are at odds with those of
traditional blue- and white-collars. Fundamentally, the left sees the
precarious as lacking in a fundamental quality that would make them
fully-fledged workers and citizens: steady employment. Precarity is thus
perceived as a lack thereof, rather than as a new condition that calls
for new types of organization and conflict.

No matter, for the precarious have bypassed unions and parties and gone
straight to the heart of the state, by being at the vanguard of
the barricades and *acampadas* that have rocked the world since 2011. In
fact, it is hard to explain the success of Podemos in European and local
elections without continuous reference to the problems created by
*precariedad laboral* (*precarious work*) and the financial abuses
committed by the political caste. Spain is a country where half
of the country’s young are unemployed, and one in four workers are
precarious. Indeed, almost all of the political cadres of Podemos, as
well as the activists behind the urban coalitions rising to municipal
power in Barcelona and Madrid, are of the precarious generation. The
precariat is behind the rise of Bernie Sanders in America and the
expressions of civic power in Iceland, Slovenia, Bosnia, and Romania (to
name but European examples). Syriza’s growth and victory at the polls in
Greece was crucially due to the mobilization of the precarious
generation. A transnational network of progressive municipalities on
immigration and the environment is being led by Ada Colau and other
left-leaning city administrations. A coherent social-populist
international has yet to coalesce, though, not least in Europe, where it
is vitally needed in order to shake off neoliberal austerity and defeat
national-populist reaction.

A new class comes into being only when it has forged a new culture and a
new ideology, new forms of self-organization, and a sense of political
activation. The precarious need to build their own organizations.
Timidly, some have begun to emerge: for instance the Freelancers Union
in North America and the Freeters Union in Japan, as well as the network
of Italian anti-precarity activists that has launched the very
successful national strike dubbed \#scioperosociale in November 2014,
and especially the Coordination des Intermittents et Précaires, the
leftist network that managed to organize France’s stage hands against
cuts to unemployment subsidies, in a labor dispute that has been ongoing
since 2003.

I think that what the precarious absolutely need is a transnational
advocacy, one that spreads news of the worst injustices that they suffer
via sophisticated, non-violent direct actions and media interventions,
while at the same time pressuring governments and supranational
institutions. *Precariat Syndicate* is currently my favorite name for
such a labor advocacy. It would combine media subvertising and workplace
picketing with knowledge of the legal and political issues surrounding
precarity, in order to affect social legislation and revert the
deterioration of labor standards. Precarious individuals from all over
the globe could join and fund it. It would be the Act Up! of the
precarious. Such an advocacy would spearhead the cause of the precariat
and defend the rights of protesters, migrants, strikers in solidarity
with antira and antifa movements.

People are taking to the streets and the networks to make their demands
heard by governments: a halt to austerity, an expansion rather than a
contraction of welfare benefits, less leeway for corporations to evade
taxes and impose precarious employment relationships, open borders and
hospitality to refugees, the extension of citizenship to long-term
immigrants, the resolute defense of the existing welfare state, social
security, healthcare, public education and public housing, and an
ecological commons. The syndicalist platform of the precariat can be
summarized as a simple triad: gender rights, cyber rights, and labor
rights.

In a regulatory crisis such as the current one, ideological power
matters enormously, since it provides the ideal blueprints to rebuild
the failed economic and social institutions of the previous phase. I
tend to share activist-cum-theorist David Graeber’s point that the
Seattle-Genoa movement was mainly about anarchism and black blocs,[^09chapter4_18]
although autonomous Marxism played an influential intellectual role.
Also, the main geopolitical effect of the anti-globalization movement
was the wave of red Bolivarianism across South America - the Porto
Alegre effect critically underscored by Michael Hardt.[^09chapter4_19]
Anti-capitalism has been the ideology of protest movements since the
anti-globalization movement. This is a catchall term that hides very
different positions, from communist to anarchist groups, and from
autonomist to queer movements.

In the table below, I take the revival of anarchism as a starting point
from which to offer a sociological taxonomy of contemporary
anti-capitalist movements that combine anarchist ethics and tactics with
the three other major sources of resistance to capital: Marxian
autonomy, green environmentalism, and pink genderism:

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------
                    ***Anarcho-green***                                      ***Anarcho-syndicalist***                          ***Anarcho-autonomist***                                     **Anarcho-feminist**
  *Aim*             Defend the Earth                                         Subvert the economy                                Smash the state                                              End the Patriarchy
  *Issue*           Climate justice                                          Social inequality                                  political domination                                         Male violence
  *Ideology*        Radical ecology                                          Revolutionary unionism                             Autonomous Marxism                                           Queer theory
  *Direct Action*   Ecotage                                                  Wildcat strike                                     Urban riot(s)                                                Pink protest tide
  *Actors*          Ecohacktivists, vegans, animalists, indigenous peoples   Precarious/migrant workers, landless, unemployed   Unemployed youth, immaterial labor, multiethnic underclass   Women, LGBTIQ persons
  *Movements*       ZAD, Climate Camps, Earth First!                         EuroMayDay, Spanish CGT, IWW                       Nuit Debout, No Border, Antifa, Invisible Committee          Ni Una Menos, \#Feministrike
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------

Table 12: Anti-Capitalism: Anarchy, Autonomy, Ecology, and Feminism

It’s vital for anarchists and autonomists of all stripes to look out to
the wider world, and open up to the queer and creative influences coming
from contemporary society and popular culture. Concerns with ideological
purity and historical fidelity are usually hindrances to the
effectiveness of political strategy, especially now that
national-populist reaction threatens everything anti-capitalists hold
dear: labor is under attack, nature is under threat, and patriarchy is
regaining ground.

Anti-capitalist movements have adopted queer pink, anarcho black, and
radical green ideological forms. Pink, black, and green insurgence seems
the name of the game. Pink, because since the rainbow flag threw the
gauntlet of protest against homophobia, queer has become revolutionary
for all sectors of society: it’s no longer simply a matter of identity
politics and civil rights, it speaks of a radical social transformation,
such as the contemporary women’s movement fighting for the end of
patriarchy and sexism. Pink because it refers to deviant *pinko*
political tendencies in non-pacified urban subcultures, experimenting
with the radical mixing of codes, genders, and ethnicities. Pink like a
clown insurrection. Ecotopian greens call for reclaiming the streets,
guerrilla gardening, critical mass-vélorution, the climate action camp,
and setting a new template for ecological protest. It’s a DIY,
eco-hacking way of dealing with environmental issues, exploring how to
empower the people in adopting alternative forms of socialization and
social organization. It is an urban insurgence, much like those which
have mobilized the Europe's autonomous youth to defend to the last
social squatting as a way of life, a way of life which has become
integral to the notion of European urban culture over the last three
decades. Self-managed zones and radical collectives are federating all
across the world, making sure that the political legacy of anarchism and
autonomism survives in contemporary cities of the world.

We have to act in defense of the biosphere, and remove carbon lobbies
from power that prevent action against climate change, while maintaining
the digital civilization which common labor, information, and knowledge
has created. Revolutionary direct action needs to be employed for ends
that are ultimately reformist: an energy and transportation system based
on renewables, an urban environment friendly to disadvantaged sections
of the population, a new welfare system favoring precarious individuals
and families, a reregulated labor market to prevent fraud, posted labor,
and other anti-union practices, carbon taxation, and levies on
individual wealth and corporate profits. NGOs and civil society cannot
mount an effective resistance and transformation of society without the
help of radicals, because they are best activists and most imaginative
organizers. Even if the precariat hates capitalism and what it does to
people and the planet, its anti-capitalism and opposition to
neoliberalism is likely to trigger fundamental reform, rather than a
revolution. It will finally tax the rich, rather than hang them.

A new (pink, black, green) political ideology is needed to give
substance to the anti-capitalist movement, which (in a nutshell) is the
interbreeding of the autonomous, anarchist, anti-fascist, queer, and
vegan tendencies that have been brewing in metropolitan subcultures. I
think anti-capitalism stands a better chance if it acts in conjunction
with a social-populist project, in order to prevail over nationalist
authoritarians and military-carbon corporatists.

It is important to not just showing rage at capitalist inequality, but
to reverse it. It is important not simply to prevent the
self-destruction of civilization, instead of simply claiming lack of.
The fight is not to return to pre-industrial nature (whatever that was
like), but foster non-capitalist relations between society and nature.

[^09chapter4_1]: Paolo Gerbaudo, *The Mask and the Flag: Populism, Citizenism and
    Global Protest*, London: Hurtst Publishers, 2014.

[^09chapter4_2]: Alan Moore, *V for Vendetta*, New York: DC Comics, 2008.

[^09chapter4_3]: Frank Miller, *The Dark Night Returns*, New York: DC Comics, 2005.

[^09chapter4_4]: Offe*, Europe Entrapped*.

[^09chapter4_5]: Its head, the Dutch Labour politician Jeroen Dijsselbloem,
    recently attacked southern European countries, comparing PIGS to
    males wasting all their money on alcohol and prostitutes, then
    asking for financial forgiveness for their behavior.

[^09chapter4_6]: Alex Foti*, La Rivoluzione della Repubblica Continentale Europea*,
    Euronomade, 20 February 2016, http://www.euronomade.info/?p=6759.

[^09chapter4_7]: They are: ‘Carrying on’, ‘Nothing but the Single Market’, ‘Those
    Who Want More Do More’, Doing Less More Efficiently, ‘Doing Much
    More Together’, and can be found on the Commission’s official
    website: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release\_IP-17-385\_en.htm

[^09chapter4_8]: Publications such as *n+1* and *Jacobin* being the most important
    examples, as well as the newborn *Catalyst*.

[^09chapter4_9]: ‘Feeling the Bern’ was the campaign slogan of Bernie Sanders in
    the 2016 presidential elections.

[^09chapter4_10]: In seminal works such as *Hegemony and Socialist Strategy,
    Agonistics*, and *The Illusion of Consensus*.

[^09chapter4_11]: In practice, it is hard to distinguish between intellectual and
    political Marxism, because every Marxist wants to start their own
    party. Marx himself was a great theorist and a bad politician. The
    same can be said of Toni Negri, who still professes himself to be a
    communist, albeit on the side of the precariat, as he recently
    argued in an interview on Italian TV. This aside, today's last line
    of defense for communism is, in my view, the Zikek-Badiou Hegelian
    neo-orthodoxy. Communists without a cause, the two are ready to
    ridicule everything except their own failings (significant in the
    case of Badiou, the last survivor of French Maoism). Although I am
    no philosopher, and this is a book of social theory, I find that the
    conflictual democracy of Jacques Rancière best expressed the
    philosophy of the 2011 revolutions, certainly better than the hugely
    popular *Indignez-vous!* by old resistance hero Hessel.

[^09chapter4_12]: This unfortunately includes David Harvey, author of the best
    commentary available on the three volumes of Marx’s *Capital*.

[^09chapter4_13]: McKenzie Wark, *Molecular Red: Theory for the Anthropocene*,
    London: Verso, 2015.

[^09chapter4_14]: Giovanni Arrighi, *Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the 21st
    Century*, Verso Books, 2009.

[^09chapter4_15]: Guy Standing, ‘Meet the precariat, the new global class fuelling
    the rise of populism’, *World Economic Forum*, November 9, 2016,
    https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/11/precariat-global-class-rise-of-populism/.

[^09chapter4_16]: I owe this synthesis to Emanuele Cozzo of *Fundación* de los
    Comunes.

[^09chapter4_17]: Paolo Gerbaudo ‘Why it’s time to occupy the state’, *Guardian*,
    December 10, 2013,
    https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/10/occupy-protesters-electoral-politics.

[^09chapter4_18]: David Graeber, ‘The New Anarchists’, *New Left Review*, 1999.
    https://newleftreview.org/II/13/david-graeber-the-new-anarchists.

[^09chapter4_19]: Michael Hardt, ‘Porto Alegre: The New Bandung?’, *New Left
    Review*, 2002.
    https://newleftreview.org/II/14/michael-hardt-porto-alegre-today-s-bandung
